# Room 6 Linux Fundamentals Part 3

Task 1 Remote Access

Deployed a Linux machine and the TryHackMe AttackBox.
Connected via SSH using ssh tryhackme@MACHINE_IP.

Task 2 Flags and Manuals
Extended command functionality with flags (ls -a, ls -l).
Consulted documentation using --help and man.

Task 3 Filesystem Interaction
Created files (touch) and directories (mkdir).
Deleted files (rm) and directories (rm -R).
Copied files (cp) and moved/renamed files (mv).
Verified file type with file.

Task 4 Permissions and Users
Listed permissions with ls -lh.
Analyzed symbolic (rwxrwxrwx) and numeric formats (777, 755, 644).
Switched users with su user2 and su -l user2.
Applied permissions using chmod.

Task 5 Common Root Directories
/etc: system configuration files (sudoers, passwd, shadow).
/var: variable data such as logs (/var/log).
/root: home directory of the root user.
/tmp: temporary storage, cleared on reboot, writable by all users.

Task 6 Processes 101
Viewing Processes: ps, ps aux, top.
Managing Processes: kill PID with signals (SIGTERM, SIGKILL, SIGSTOP).
Initialization: PID 0 starts at boot via systemd.
Systemctl: manage services (start, stop, enable, disable, status).
Foreground/Background: run with &, suspend with Ctrl+Z, resume with fg.

Task 7 Maintaining Your System: Automation
Cron & Crontabs: schedule tasks with 6 values (MIN, HOUR, DOM, MON, DOW, CMD).
Example: backup every 12 hours:
Code
0 */12 * * * cp -R /home/cmnatic/Documents /var/backups/
Edit crontabs with crontab -e.

Task 8 Maintaining Your System: Package Management

Repositories: official and community repositories managed via apt.
Adding Repositories:
Add GPG key with apt-key.
Create .list file in /etc/apt/sources.list.d/.
Update with apt update.
Install with apt install.
Removing Packages: apt remove software-name or add-apt-repository --remove.

Task 9 Maintaining Your System: Logs

Logs stored in /var/log.
Examples:
Apache2 (access, error logs).
Fail2ban (brute force attempts).
UFW firewall logs.
Log Rotation: automatic management to prevent excessive growth.
Logs provide visibility into system health, performance, and security.

Tools Used
Access & Deployment: SSH, TryHackMe AttackBox (Ubuntu).
Core Commands: ls, cd, man, touch, mkdir, rm, cp, mv, file, chmod, su.
Process Management: ps, top, kill, systemctl.
Automation: cron, crontab.
Package Management: apt, add-apt-repository, apt-key, dpkg.
Logs: /var/log directory, Apache2, fail2ban, UFW.
Text Editors: Nano, VIM.
Utilities: wget, scp.

Findings
SSH enables secure remote command execution.
Flags and manuals expand and document command behavior.
File operations are essential for system administration.
Permissions control access and must follow least privilege.
Processes are the backbone of system activity, managed by PIDs and systemd.
Cron jobs automate repetitive tasks.
Package management ensures secure installation and updates.
Logs provide critical visibility into system and application behavior.

Mitigation / Practical Application
Always use SSH with secure credentials and encryption.
Apply minimal necessary permissions with chmod.
Monitor /var/log for anomalies and protect sensitive files in /etc.
Use backgrounding for long-running tasks to maintain productivity.
Automate backups and maintenance with cron.
Verify repositories and GPG keys before adding third-party software.
Regularly update apt for patches and security fixes.
Restrict /root access to authorized administrators only.

Conclusion
This Linux Fundamentals module covered:
Remote connection via SSH.
Advanced command usage with flags and manuals.
File and directory management.
Permissions and user switching.
Process management and automation.
Package management and logs.
Consistent practice of these concepts is key to building fluency in Linux system administration.
Mastery of these fundamentals strengthens security and efficiency in production environments.

